writeup.md, before:

# CAIS Winter Project
Aidan Parris ajparris@usc.edu

## 1 - Project Presentation
I chose to do the facial expression recognition task. Because this dataset is images, I used a convolutional neural network that uses convolutional layers with 3x3 filters and batch normalization. There are three sections, each with increasing numbers of filters and with max-pooling layers after.

## 2 - Dataset
This dataset contains seven expression classes: anger, disgust, fear, happy, sad, suprise, and neutral. There are 28,709 images in the train category and 7,178 images in the test category giving a train/test split of 0.8. The smallest category is disgust with a total of 547 photos and the largest category is happy with 8,989 images. Other than these two classes, the dataset is fairly balanced. The lack of examples of disgust led to issues achieving high accuracy for this class. Each image is 48 by 48 pixels and grayscale in the range \[0, 255].
![Img](/plots/class_count.png)

## 3 - Model Development and Training
Initially, the model I had had a couple of convolutional layers that had ~1000 outputs when flattened then those fed into a neural network with dense layers that of varying sizes that led to a final softmax layer. This led to a model that would overfit and only predict one or two classes. Inspired by [this kaggle notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/mohamedchahed/human-emotion-detection), I changed to the convolutional layer's outputs feeding directly into a softmax. I also changed to have pooling layers and added activation functions to the convolutional layers. Changing the number of convolutional layers had little effect on the accuracy after a certain size so the main limitation seems to be model architecture not size.

I used Keras, which is built into Tensorflow, and used their learning rate scheduler to decrease the learning rate when the categorical cross-entropy plateau. I used Adam with an initial learning rate of .02 which decreased by .3 times on plateau.

## 4 - Model Evaluation/ Results
The models would stop improving after about 20 epochs. Below are the accuracy and cross-entropy loss versus epoch graphs for the best-performing model.

![Img](/plots/model6_accuracy.png)
![Img](/plots/model6_cross_entropy.png)

Further training did not improve the cross-entropy loss. Below are the metrics and confusion matrix of the best model.

![Img](/plots/model6_metrics.png)
![Img](/plots/model6_confusion.png)

The overall accuracy was 60% which is similar to other models on Kaggle. The f1-score varies a lot between classes and is pretty correlated to the size of each class. The model has issues predicting the disgust class. The random selection of mispredicted images shows some interesting trends. It seems like some of these mispredictions are mislabeled and some are not human faces. Also, some examples have text over them. This may account for some of the model's inaccuracy.

![Img](/plots/model5_misclassified.png)

## 5 - Discussion
Overall, I was fairly succesussful at implimenting a CNN that was capable of detecting facial expressions. A comperable accuracy to other models on Kaggle was achived. Some areas for further research are trying new model architectures and potential skip layers to prevent the model from losing broad information about faces. Although a previous atttempt to feed the CNN's outputs into a neural network were not sucessful as they would overfit and only end up predicting the most common category as can be seen in this [graph of a hybryd model's confusion matrix](plots/mixed_cnn_nn_1_confusion.png). Both small (~30 neuron) and large (~6000 neuron) neural networks were prone to this overfitting even after only a couple of epochs.

Commit message:

added final grpahs, finalized writeup

writeup.md, after:

# CAIS Winter Project
Aidan Parris ajparris@usc.edu

## 1 - Project Presentation
I chose to do the facial expression recognition task. Because this dataset is images, I used a convolutional neural network that uses convolutional layers with 3x3 filters and batch normalization. There are three sections, each with increasing numbers of filters and with max-pooling layers after.

## 2 - Dataset
This dataset contains seven expression classes: anger, disgust, fear, happy, sad, suprise, and neutral. There are 28,709 images in the train category and 7,178 images in the test category giving a train/test split of 0.8. The smallest category is disgust with a total of 547 photos and the largest category is happy with 8,989 images. Other than these two classes, the dataset is fairly balanced. The lack of examples of disgust led to issues achieving high accuracy for this class. Each image is 48 by 48 pixels and grayscale in the range \[0, 255].
![Img](/plots/class_count.png)

## 3 - Model Development and Training
Initially, the model I had had a couple of convolutional layers that had ~1000 outputs when flattened then those fed into a neural network with dense layers that of varying sizes that led to a final softmax layer. This led to a model that would overfit and only predict one or two classes. Inspired by [this kaggle notebook](https://www.kaggle.com/code/mohamedchahed/human-emotion-detection), I changed to the convolutional layer's outputs feeding directly into a softmax. I also changed to have pooling layers and added activation functions to the convolutional layers. Changing the number of convolutional layers had little effect on the accuracy after a certain size so the main limitation seems to be model architecture not size.

Afer this model, I attempted to improve the accuracy by having the outputs of the CNN feed into a neural network. At first this led to similar overfitting, however, after decreasing the learning rate, these models begain to outperform the CNN into softmax. Increasing the filters from 64 to 100 and fine tuning the size of the NN, and adding a dropout layer after the CNN led the best performing model.

I used Keras, which is built into Tensorflow. This offered easy model creation, training, and analysis. I used the built in learning rate scheduler to decrease the learning rate on pleatu and used categorical cross entropy as the model's loss metric. The final model used Adam with a learning rate of $5*10^{-5}$ and was initially trained for 15 epochs. A further 7 epochs did not improve the results further.

## 4 - Model Evaluation/ Results
The models would stop improving after about 20 epochs. Below are the accuracy and cross-entropy loss versus epoch graphs for the best-performing model.

![Img](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_accuracy.png)
![Img](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_cross_entropy.png)

Further training did not improve the cross-entropy loss as evident by a second training where the [accuracy](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_2_accuracy.png) and [cross entropy](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_2_cross_entropy.png) begin to diverge between the training and validation dataset. This indicates overfitting to the training datase. Below are the metrics and confusion matrix of the best model.

![Img](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_metrics.png)
![Img](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_confusion.png)

The accuracy was 63% which is similar to other models on Kaggle. The f1-score varies a lot between classes. As shown by the disgust class having the lowest suppourt and f1-score, the model's ability to predict classes is correlated to the classes' size. The random selection of mispredicted images shows some interesting trends. It seems like some of these mispredictions are mislabeled and some are not human faces. Also, some examples include text which may negatively impact the model. 

![Img](/plots/hybrid_low_lr2_misclassified.png)

## 5 - Discussion
Overall, I was fairly succesussful at implimenting a CNN that was capable of detecting facial expressions. A comperable accuracy to other models on Kaggle was achived. Some areas for further research are trying new model architectures and potential skip layers to prevent the model from losing broad information about faces. Initially, I had issues adding a neural network to the end of the CNN as it the models would overfit and [only predict one class](/plots/small_cnn2_hybrid_lowlr3_confusion.png). I learned that adding a NN required lowering the learning rate by about two orders of magnitude to prevent this overfitting. Also, adding more filtes to the CNN increased the model's accuracy. However, there were diminising returns and required more compute time for training and compute. Further increasing filters is a potential avenue to further increase the model's accuracy.
